# Font Rasterization and Glyphs

&nbsp;

Font authoring is a highly specialist field with a [myriad terms](https://www.monotype.com/resources/studio/typography-terms). I don't understand all of them myself and, even if I did, it would be overkill to explain it all here. To understand text in GameMaker we don't need to be fully fluent in the lingo nor do we need to understand how exactly to design and create fonts ourselves. What we do need to know, however, is the process that GameMaker uses to render fonts.

Fonts are defined using geometric shapes that can be scaled up and down to whatever size you want. There's a lot of nuance as to how that happens (especially at low resolutions) because those pure geometric shapes have to be crushed down to pixels to be drawn. This is called **rasterization** and it's a relatively slow process. You definitely *can* perform rasterization in realtime but it doesn't leave you much CPU time for anything else, like, for example, the game part of your game.

We can improve on this expensive process by doing all the rasterization work when we build the game, rather than when the game runs. Languages built on an [alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alphabet), [abjad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abjad), or [abugida](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abugida) typically repeat characters frequently so we can rasterize those characters once and then re-use that result. In fact, rasterization is _so_ expensive that we should rasterize all the symbols as well. We can store all the characters we need into a big image, store that image somewhere, and then later draw individual parts of the image to the screen for each character that's needed.

Not every language is [segmental](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_writing_systems#Segmental_scripts) though. For languages that have thousands of characters that could be used - Chinese and Japanese being the two really common ones - we need to be more selective in the characters that we cache. This pre-rendering process is still benefitial, however. It's faster to draw bits from a texture page than to handle the raw font shapes for every character, even if the texture page takes up substantially more memory.

Some scripts, such as Arabic, require additional and meaningful graphics to be drawn in and around characters in order to convey the correct meaning. We use a specific term for all the various shapes and doodles that a font might contain, even if they're not strictly "a letter": we call them **glyphs**. The vast majority of the time, text display requires many more glyphs than the 26 letters an English-speaking reader might be familiar with.

And that's how GameMaker works - when you define a font and set the rendering parameters (size, bold/italic etc.) GameMaker runs [some software](https://freetype.org/) in the background that rasterizes all the glyphs for the new font. The image that FreeType spits out is then stored on a [texture page](https://manual.yoyogames.com/Settings/Texture_Information/Texture_Pages.htm) ready for use in your game. When you call `draw_text()` (or [associated functions](https://manual.yoyogames.com/GameMaker_Language/GML_Reference/Drawing/Text/Text.htm)) then GameMaker will grab glyphs off of the texture page and draw them in the right order to produce readable text.

?> Once you've rendered glyphs from your font at a certain size, you're locked in. Unless we redraw the entire set of glyphs, we cannot change the size of what's been cached. We can scale the rasterized graphics up and down but this rarely looks good. This means that if you want to vary text size in GameMaker, you need to create different font assets for each size, which is annoying. [MSDF fonts](msdf-fonts) go a long way to solving this, a feature that is only available in Scribble.